[libc++] Implement P2545R4 Read-Copy Update (RCU) (#175451)
llvm/llvm-project: libcxx/docs/DesignDocs/RCU.rst

====================
``<rcu>`` Design
====================

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

Introduction
============

This is the C++ paper `Read-Copy Update (RCU) <https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2023/p2545r4.pdf>`__.
There are three designs discussed in the paper `Supplementary Material for User-Level Implementations of
Read-Copy Update <http://www.rdrop.com/users/paulmck/RCU/urcu-supp-accepted.2011.08.30a.pdf>`__

- Quiescent-State-Based Reclamation RCU
- General-Purpose RCU
- Low-Overhead RCU Via Signal Handling

libc++ adopted a variation that closely resembles the "General-Purpose RCU" design in the above paper.

Background Information

> ======================

Reviewer: I'm not 100% sure where, but I think it would be extremely helpful to present a summary of the synopsis of the standardized API. That way we have an anchor when you talk about some of these APIs below. For example:

```
class rcu_domain {
public:
  void lock() noexcept;
  bool try_lock() noexcept;
  void unlock() noexcept;
};

rcu_domain& rcu_default_domain() noexcept;
// etc..
```

Really just the most prominent parts of the API. No need for copy constructors & friends, for instance.

`rcu` is an alternative to read-write locks and it is suitable for read-mostly data structures.
Here is an example usage ::

>   struct Data /* members */ ;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  struct Data { /* members */ };
```

  std::atomic<Data*> data_;

  // ==============================================
  template <typename Func>
  Result reader_op(Func fn) {
    std::scoped_lock l(std::rcu_default_domain());
    Data* p = data_;
    // fn should not block too long or call
    // rcu_synchronize(), rcu_barrier(), or
    // rcu_retire(), directly or indirectly
    return fn(p);
 }

  // ==============================================
  // May be called concurrently with reader_op
  void update(Data* newdata) {
    Data* olddata = data_.exchange(newdata);
    std::rcu_retire(olddata); // reclaim *olddata when safe
  }

> There are several key details that an implementation of `rcu` must address:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are several key properties that an implementation of `rcu` must satisfy:
```

- On the reader side, `rcu_domain::lock` and `rcu_domain::unlock` must not block the thread while the writer thread
  is performing updates.

- On the writer side, `retire` -ing an object in principle should not block at all. However, it is conforming to

>   evaluate the `deleter` s inside `run_retire` .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- On the writer side, `retire`-ing an object in principle should not block at all. However, it is technically conforming to block (e.g. evaluate the `deleter`s directly inside `run_retire`).
```

- On the writer side, `rcu_synchronize` should block until at least all the existing readers exit their critical sections
  via `rcu_domain::unlock` . Note that this is a key difference between `rcu` and read-write locks:
  In case a late reader enters the critical section after the writer thread has called `rcu_synchronize` and waiting, the

>   writer thread does not need to wait for the late reader to exit the critical section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- On the writer side, `rcu_synchronize` should block until at least all the existing readers exit their critical sections
  via `rcu_domain::unlock` . Note that this is a key difference between `rcu` and read-write locks:
  In case a late reader enters the critical section after the writer thread has called `rcu_synchronize` and started waiting, the
  writer thread does not need to wait for the late reader to exit the critical section. In contrast, a writer thread trying to acquire a read-write lock would have to wait until the late reader releases the lock before it can acquire it.
```

> - On the writer side, `run_barrier` should block until all the `retired` objects that happen before the `run_barrier` call are reclaimed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- On the writer side, `rcu_barrier` should block until all the objects `retired` before the `rcu_barrier` call have been reclaimed.
```

- The threads that are using `rcu` must be known by the `rcu` implementation states.

Adopted Design
==============

> The core idea of `rcu` can be described in this simple image from lwn.net

Reviewer: Let's make this a real link to lwn.net.

```suggestion
The core idea of `rcu` can be described by this image from lwn.net
```

I would also suggest dropping `simple` -- RCU is all but simple IMO!

.. image:: https://static.lwn.net/images/ns/kernel/rcu/GracePeriodGood.png

- Each row is a thread. The last row is the writer thread and the rows above are the reader threads.
- Each "Reader" block represents a critical section, which starts with `rcu_domain::lock` and ends with `rcu_domain::unlock` .

> - When `run_retire` is called from the writer thread, it starts the "Removal" block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When `rcu_retire` is called from the writer thread, it starts the "Removal" block.
```

This typo was made elsewhere, let's do a pass to fix them all!

- When `run_synchronize` is called from the writer thread, it starts the "Grace Period" block. We need to wait until all the 
  "Reader" blocks that started before the "Grace Period" started, to exit via `rcu_domain::unlock`, then we can end the "Grace Period".
  Note that the "Grace Period" ends after the 4th row's "Reader" block ends. Also note that the "Grace Period" does not need to wait
  for the late "Reader" blocks.
- After the "Grace Period" ends, we can start the "Reclaim" block to reclaim the retired objects.

Libc++ adopted a design that closely resembles the "General-Purpose RCU" design in the above paper.

Some key details of this design are:

- There is a global state which has two phases and it flips between the two phases.
- Each thread stores its state: whether there is a reader in the critical section, and which phase it was when it entered the critical section.
- When `run_synchronize` is called, it

  - flips the global state to the next phase
  - Going through a grace period: waits until all the threads that are in the critical section with the previous phase to exit the critical section.
  - flips the global state back to the original phase

>   - Going through another grace period: waits until all the threads that are in the critical section ith the next phase to exit the critical section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Going through another grace period: waits until all the threads that are in the critical section with the next phase to exit the critical section.
```

there might be a late reader that enters the critical section after we flip the global state and before we wait for the previous phase's readers to exit.

Implementation Terminology
---------------------------

- reader: A thread that calls `rcu_domain::lock` and `rcu_domain::unlock` to enter and exit the critical section.

- quiescent state: When a thread is *not* in an RCU read-side critical section (between `lock` and `unlock`),
  it is in a quiescent state.

- grace period: Any time period during which every thread has been in at least one quiescent state is a grace period.
  The grace period cannot end until all pre-existing readers have exited their critical sections. (see the image above)

Implementation Details
----------------------

`thread_local_container`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A helper class that manages thread local objects. It provides APIs to get the `thread_local` object for the current thread, and to iterate through all the `thread_local` objects from all threads.
It only contains `static` member variables and functions.

> It uses `mutex` to protect the list of all object pointers. Since the list is only modified when a thread first calls `get_current_thread_instance` to register itself, and when a thread exits, 

Reviewer: One option here instead of a `thread_local` `std::optional` would be to always call a thread-local function pointer. The function pointer starts off as an initialization function, and when it's done, it replaces itself by a function pointer that uses the state directly.

Not sure that's better, it might not be, but it's worth discussing later so I'm making a note here.

the contention on the `mutex` should be low.

TODO: We need to replace `mutex` as all non allocating APIs in `rcu` are designed to be `noexcept` and `mutex` can throw.

`reader_states`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It defines the state of each reader thread. The state is essentially a pair of `(phase, lock_nested_level)` merged into a single `uint16_t` . 

- `phase` is a single bit as the global state only has two phases. This `phase` is the phase of the global state when the current thread enters the critical section.
- `lock_nested_level` is the nested level of the `rcu_domain::lock` . As you can call `rcu_domain::lock` multiple times in the same thread, we need to keep track of the nested level.
  When `lock_nested_level` is `0`, it means the current thread is in a quiescent state (not in a critical section).

> The `reader_states` class is also a `static` helper class which only provides static definitions and functions, instead of the wrapper of the `uint16_t` state. This is because we need

Reviewer: This is a bit early in the design review, but I envision that I will probably push for defining the class as a normal class (with member functions, not static), and then having a `thread_local` instance of that class. Happy to discuss if this doesn't make sense, but basically I would try to avoid baking the singleton pattern into this class if it can be avoided.

the `atomic` integer API, e.g. `fetch_or`. An `atomic` of a wrapper struct won't have these APIs.

> `rcu_singly_list_view`

Reviewer: Could you explain why we're not using `intrusive_list_view` that we use in `stop_token`? No need to add it to the documentation, but I am curious here.

Author: This is due to some details of this implementation. This implementation has 3 queues:
- objects in the todo list
- objects on phase 1
- objects on phase 2

We need a `splice_back` operation to efficiently moving objects between these 3 queues

and in order to make this operation efficient, we need to store both `head` and `tail` in the list, which the `stop_token` one does not

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A helper class that provides a view of the intrusive singly linked list of `__rcu_node` s. It also stores the back pointer of the list to make the push back operation more efficient.
It provides APIs to push a node to the back of the list, splice from another list and to iterate through the list.

For the derived class of `rcu_obj_base`, the `retire` is `noexcept`, which means that no memory allocation can happen when pushing it to the retired callback queue.

`rcu_domain_impl`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This is the main class that implements the `rcu` logic. It contains

- `std::atomic<reader_states::state_type> global_reader_phase_` : the global state that flips between two phases. The readers will record the phase when they enter the critical section, and the writer will flip the global state when it calls `run_synchronize` to start a new grace period.

> - `std::mutex grace_period_mutex_` : If we have multiple writer threads calling `run_synchronize` concurrenly, we need to make sure only one of them is performing the phase flipping and deleter queue draining.

Reviewer: The phase is already atomic, so it doesn't need a mutex (right?). So this is guarding the deleter queue draining exclusively?

Note: stopped reviewing here.

Author: `run_synchronize`  isn't just flipping the `atomic` flag, it also has other operations including draining the queue and flipping the flag again etc. It is very challenging to avoid this mutex. In any case, this `mutex` is protecting multiple writers and writer thread is not what is optimised for in RCU
